"Redcedar has been called 'the cornerstone of northwest coast Indian culture' and the large-scale use of its wood and bark delineates the cultural boundary of the northwest coast people within its range. The easily split, rot-resistant wood was used to make important cultural items such as dugout canoes, house planks and posts, totem and mortuary poles, bentwood boxes, baskets, clothing and hats, and a variety of tools and implements such as dishes, arrow shafts, harpoon shafts, spear poles, barbecue sticks, fish spreaders and hangers, dip=net hooks, fish clubs, masks, rattles, benches, cradles, coffins, herring rakes, canoe bailers, ceremonial drum logs, cobs, fishing floats, berry-drying racks, fish weirs, spirit whistles, and paddles. It was used by the Kwakwaka'wakw and other groups to make a drill and hearth for starting friction firest. Redcedar was considered an excellent fuel, especially for drying fish, because it burns with little smoke. Few cedar trees were actually felled before European contact. Instead, fallen logs or boards split from standing trees were used. To split off cedar boards for house planks or half-logs for canoes, a series of graduated yew-wood or antler wedges were pounded into living trees along the grain.

The power of the redcedar tree was said to be so strong a person could receive strength by standing with his or her back to the tree. Redcedar was used for a variety of ailments. It is called the 'tree of life' by the Kwakwaka'wakw and is still held wit highest respect by all northwest coast peoples for its healing and spiritual powers. A Coast Salish myth says the Great Spirit created redcedar in honour of a man who was always helping others: 'When he dies and where he is buried, a cedar tree will grow and be useful to the people-the roots for baskets, the bark for clothing, the wood for shelter' (Stewart 1984)"  (Pojar and MacKinnon 2004,reproduced with permission).

From USDA:

“Wood served for house planks, house posts, roof boards, various kinds of boxes, and canoes. Bark was made into skirts, capes, and complete dresses for women, and roots and limbs were used for baskets and rope. The inner bark was used for slow matches to carry the fire from camp to camp, and also as mats, and baskets. Various medicines were derived from the tree.” (Nesom 2003).

Restoration application

Deer and elk browse on the twigs and foliage, whereas trees squirrels and porcupines use the fibrous bark strips for nesting material. Grosbeaks, sparrows, waxwings,nuthatches, and siskins are birds that eat the winged seeds. Birds such asjuncos, jays, and warblers find important shelter and nest sites in the dense foliage. (WNPS)

Associations

Alternative names include giant arborvitae, western arborvitae, giant red-cedar, Pacific red-cedar,shinglewood, and canoe cedar. (Nesom 2003) Western red cedars are commonly found in swales or wet ditches, marshes or swamps, bogs, fens, seeps, springs, bog margins, stream or river banks, riparian corridors, alluvial areas, and coniferous forests. (WNPS)