"The wood is strong and hard; it never cracks or warps when properly prepared. It is most widely used for making implements among the Interior Salish. On the coast, the Saanich used the wood for bows and arrows, and the Lummi of Washington made combs, netting shuttles and, recently, knitting needles. The Cowlitz also used the wood for combs, and the Skagit made arrow shafts. 

The leaves and flowers foam into a lather when bruised and rubbed with the hands. This lather was used for cleansing the skin by the Snohomish and Cowlitz, as well by various interior groups. 

This shrub has showy and aromatic flowers, and it has horticultural potential in native plant gardens. The commonly grown garden plant in the Pacific Northwest is the European P. coronarius.

Aristotle gave the name Philadelphus to a tree, now unknown, to commemorate Pharoah Ptolemy II Philadelphus (308-246 B.C.). Somehow the name, which means 'brotherly love,' was applied to this shrub. It has nothing to do with the city of Philadelphia, where a whole block once burned after the police bombed a house to keep the peace" (Pojar and MacKinnon 2004; reproduced with permission).


Restoration Application

"Lewis Mockorange is readily propagated by seed, stem cuttings, layering, root suckers, or division. Containers, beds for bareroot plant production, and weed free, well drained revegetation sites may be sown in the fall (untrated seed) or spring (treated seed) and the seed lightly covered. The species may be propagated from softwood cuttings taken in spring and treated with 1000 ppm of IBA (Indolebutyric acid). Hardwood cuttings can be similarly treated but often root readily without enhancement, allowing for direct sticking or live staking on revegetation sites. Mulch or irrigation and weed suppression the first summer can greatly improve establishment of unrooted cuttings." (Dale Darris and Pete Gonzalves, 2009)



Wildlife Value

Birds: Birds including catbirds, grosbeaks, juncos, thrushes, bluebirds, chickadees, flickers, finches, quail, and grouse are known to eat the seeds.

Insects: Swallowtail, common wood nymph, and other butterflies harvest the nectar.

Mammals: Deer and elk browse the shrub. (WNPS)


Associations

They are also known as syringa, Indian arrowwood, and wild mockorange. Lewis' mock orange and mock-orange are alternative spellings. (USDA) They are commonly found in Coastal bluffs, cliffs, rocky slopes, open forests, forest edges, openings, or clearings, and disturbed sites. (WNPS) 