"Red alder wood is considered to be the best possible fuel for smoking salmon and other types of fish. It is soft and even-grained, and is still used for making feast bowls, masks, rattles, and a variety of other items.

Its bark is used to make a red or orange dye, especially valued for colouring inner redcedar bark. The name 'red alder' may derive from this use. Variations in dye colour are obtained from different ages and quantities of the bark, and from the use of other substances such as urine to fix the colouring. Fishing nets were sometimes coloured with alder-bark dye to make them invisible to fish. 

The inner bark of red alder was eaten in spring by the Straits Salish and other northwest coast people. Alder bark was highly valued for its medicinal qualities. A solution of the bark was used against tuberculosis and other respiratory ailments and as a tonic, and was been credited with saving many lives. It was also used as a wash for skin infections and wounds, and is known to have strong antibiotic properties.

'Alder' appears to be from Old English alor or Old High German elo or elawer meaning 'red-dish-yellow,' in reference to the colour that develops when the wood is freshly exposed" (Pojar and MacKinnon 2004,reproduced with permission).


From USDA:

The inner bark was oftendried, grounded into a powder and then used as a thickener in soups or mixedwith cereals when making bread. Various layers of the red alder bark yield red,red-brown, brown, orange, and yellow dyes. The various colors from the barkwere used to color baskets, hides, moccasins, quills, and hair. The NativeAmericans of the Pacific Northwest extracted a red dye from the inner bark,which was used to dye fishnets. (Favorite & Immel 2006)

Restoration application

The leavesare eaten by swallowtail butterfly larvae and tent caterpillars. Mammals thateat the twigs, leaves, or wood include snowshoe hares, beavers, porcupines,deer, and elk. Alders create organic debris for soil organisms. (WNPS)

Associations

Alternative names include PacificCoast alder, Oregon alder, and western alder. (USDA) Red aldertrees grow in seasonally inundated areas, scrub-shrub wetlands, and forestedwetlands, as well as by stream or river banks, riparian corridors, floodplains,bottomlands, slide areas, forests and woods, logged sites and disturbed sites.(WNPS)