Nuxalk/Kwakwaka'wakw/Halq'emeylem/Stl'atl'imx: The sweet inner bark and cambium tissues were eaten in late spring and early summer immediately after they were harvested so they would not ferment. 

Hesquiat/Nuu-chah-nulth/Ditidaht: The buds were picked in the spring and boiled in deer fat to make a fragrant salve, which was molded in the bulbous float of bull kelp. 

Nuxalk: the gum from the buds was used in preparations for baldness, sore throats, whooping cough and tuberculosis...the old, rotten leaves were boiled and used in a bath for body pains, rheumatism and stomach trouble. 

Stl'atl'imx/Tahltan: Cottonwood was used as a fuel for smoking fish. Coast Salish: Cottonwood was thought by the Squaxin to be an antiseptic plant; they placed the bruised leaves on cuts and made an infusion from the bark for sore throats. 

Quinault: This group placed the gum that exudes from the burls of cottonwood directly on cuts and wounds, and took a bark infusion for tuberculosis.

Ditidaht: The inner bark was used to reinforce other plant fibres in spinning. Vancouver Island Salish: This group occasionally made small dugout canoes from black cottonwood, a practice more common among interior tribes. The aromatic gum from the spring buds of cottonwood was used to waterproof baskets and boxes. 

Okanagan/Upper Halq'emeylem/Cowlitz: Friction-fire sets were made using dried cottonwood roots for the hearth and dried branches for the drill. 

Okanagan: Soap and a hair wash were made using ashes from cottonwood. 

Coast Salish/Okanagan/Stl'atl'imx: The bark was stripped off and used to make buckets for carrying and storing food. Young shoots were used to make sweatlodge frames. 

Nisga'a/Quinault: Temporary cabins were occasionally constructed using cottonwood bark, and the roots were twisted into rope for tying house planks and making fish traps. 

Okanagan/Stl'atl'imx: The aromatic gum from the spring buds was used as a glue for securing arrowheads and feathers to shafts. Cottonwood is thought to have a life of its own by the Chehalis because it shakes when there is no wind, and for this reason it was never used for firewood. 

Okanagan/Ditidaht: the rich, yellow, aromatic gum from the buds was boiled in grease and mixed with other pigments (alder bark, larch, wolf lichen, charcoal) to make paint (Pojar and MacKinnon 2004).From USDA:

“Disinfectant properties of resin from buds were discovered by Native Americans, who used the resin to treat sore throats, coughs, lung pain, and rheumatism.  It is still used in some modern natural health ointments.  Soap was produced from the inner bark.  The wood was used to make friction fire sets.” (USDA)

Restoration Applications:
The rapid growth of this tree, which is typical of pioneer species, makes it a great choice for over-shading and crowding out invasive species in wet areas. Black cottonwood is easily live staked and its extensive lateral root system helps to filter and stabilize soil especially on steep slopes  (USDA).

Wildlife value: High nesting and perching value for birds, including species like bald eagles, herons, owls, woodpeckers, hummingbirds, and flickers. Large mature trees provide cover for streams reducing the water temperature which benefits aquatic life such as fish. (US Forest Service). 

Wildlife Value: From USDA:"They provide food source and cover for a variety of wildlife species, including deer, elk, and beaver. Large birds use the crowns for nesting sites and various animals rely on the trunk cavities, which commonly result from heart rot in most stands nearing maturity. The rotten trunks of black cottonwood provide an important wildlife habitat otherwise scarce, especially of the Cascades." (Guy Nesom, 2002).

Associations: Black cottonwood is often found growing in wetlands, stream banks, floodplains and near other wet areas in communities made up of western hemlock, skunk cabbage, Douglas fir, western red cedar and salmonberry. References in "Plant Details" Section.